These are some simple design notes to document this program and to guide
further work.

This program is designed to do the following:

  a) Encapsulate every RNG known to humans for testing.  We will use the
GSL both for its rich supply of ready-to-test RNG's and for its
relatively simple and consistent encapsulation of any new RNG's we add
-- /dev/random is already encapsulated and can serve as a template for
future work. [1/16/03 rgb]

  b) test speed of the available RNG's.  Both:
     i) In "native/standard" subroutine calls (with the subroutine call
        overhead included).  [This is done, 1/16/03, rgb]
    ii) In a custom "vector" form, where a whole block of dedicated
        memory is filled in one pass from a given algorithm, and
        subsequently accessed via a macro that only calls for a refill
        when the vector is exhausted.

  c) test quality of the available RNG's.  There are at least three
primary sources of tests that will be used in this tool.  

     i) RGB tests.  These are the tests I myself have implemented.  To
        the best of my knowledge these are new, although of course
        my knowledge is far from complete.

    ii) DIEHARD, by Dr. George Marsaglia of FSU.  This is a well-known
        and venerable "battery of tests" of RNG's.

   iii) NIST STS/FIPS (NIST special publication 800-22, revised
        5/15/2001).  This is also a suite of RNG tests, with some
        overlap with DIEHARD.  I will probably implement only selected
        tests from this suite at least at first, as some of them
        appear to be relatively weak compared to e.g. rgb_binomial
        and to test basically the same thing.

    iv) Additional tests that are to be found on the web and in the
        literature, where they appear to test things not
        well-represented in tests already implemented in one suite
        or another.

  d) test quality of any input set of "random" data according to i-iv in
c).  This will let us test arbitrary RNG's via their data, including and
especially hardware generators.  Note that hardware generators available
as "devices" will be interfaced via a).  This step will only be
implemented when enough tests to make it worthwhile are already
implemented.


         Addendum and explanation of copyright issues.

The STS was written by a variety of authors:

  Andrew Rukhin, Juan Soto, James Nechvatal, Miles Smid, Elaine Barker,
  Stefan Leigh, Mark Levenson, Mark Vangel, David Banks, Alan Heckert,
  James Dray, San Vo.

None of the actual code in the STS suite has been used in this tool --
all testing routines have been written using only the STS published
document as an excellent reference.  GSL routines have been used
throughout, where possible, for computing things such as erfc or Q.
Since I am not using their code, I am omitting their copyright notice,
but wish to acknowledge their documentation of the selected tests
anyway.  All the code in dieharder is GPL open source in any event, but
academic credit matters.

Similarly, DIEHARD is the work of George Marsaglia.  Dr. Marsaglia
doen't have any written copyright notice or license terms that I could
find in the sources provided on the website where he openly distributes
source for his own suite, but in keeping with a minor design goal of
completely original GPL code, all the DIEHARD algorithms have also been
completely rewritten without directly utilizing any of the actual
diehard code.  Fortunately, Dr.  Marsaglia also provides clear
documentation for his test suite, making it a fairly simple matter to
implement the tests.  Source code WAS examined (but not copied) to
clarify places where the documentation of the tests was openly erroneous
(as in the parking lot test) or unclear but dieharder code is completely
original and its development thoroughly documented in CVS and (later)
SVN tree form, checkin by checkin.

The relatively few tests I have added are motivated by a desire to get a
less ambiguous answer than many of these tests provide.  In many cases
it is not (or should not) be correct to say that one "accepts" a
generator as being a good one just because a test run of the generator
has a p-value significantly greater than 0.  A few moment's
experimentation, especially with relatively small data sets, should
convince one that even "bad" RNG's can sometimes, or even frequently,
return an "acceptable" p-value.  Only when the size of the test is
increased, or the test is repeatedly run with different seeds, does it
become apparent that although it sometimes performs acceptably (the
result of a run isn't inconsistent with the generator producing "real"
random numbers) it sometimes performs so poorly that the result can
>>never<< be explained or believed for a true random number generator.

That is, while a really poor p-value allows us to reject the hypothesis
that the tested generator is random, acceptable p-values, even a fair
number of them in repeated tests, do not usually support accepting the
hypothesis -- at best they don't support rejection.

Running a test repeatedly to generate a full distribution of results and
then directly comparing the entire distribution with theory appears to
provide greater sensitivity and accuracy in the rejection process than
"simple" tests that generate only a single quantity.  This motivated the
rgb_binomial test, which has proven very good at rejecting "bad" rng's.

Similarily, it may prove useful to directly generate an empirical
distribution of p-values themselves (repeating a test many times with
different seeds and binning the p-values) and compare it to the expected
distribution (which might work for erfc-based p-values, although not so
well for Q-based p-values).  This can replace running a test many times
looking for an anomalous number of "poor" p-values mixed in with ones
that are not so poor as to lead to immediate rejection.

Contributions of rng's (consistently GSL-wrapped as e.g. dev_random.c
demonstrates) and/or additional tests would be most welcome.

     rgb


                     STS Critique, By Statistic

                       The Monobit Statistic

The monobit statistic checks to make sure that the raw number of 1's and
0's approximately balance in a given bitstring.  This is actually a
decent thing to test, but there is a better way to test it.  Given a
relatively short bitstring (e.g. n<=160 bits), the probability that it
will have k bits according to the null hypothesis is p(n,k,1/2) (the
binomial distribution of outcomes over n independent trials, each with
p=1/2).  If one runs m runs of n independent trials each, and
accumulates X[k] (the count histogram for each possible value of output
k in [0,n]) then one has X[k], the expected value histogram Y(k) =
m*p(n,k,1/2), and sigma(k) = sqrt(m)*p(n,k,1/2).  From this it is simple
to compute a p-value from an incomplete gamma function for the
>>details<< of the distribution of 1's.  One can even do it two ways --
with an independent random number seed for each of the m samples, or
by simply running the rng with its original seed long enough to produce
m*n bits.

This binomial test is stronger than the monobit test.  Any result
histogram that passes it necessarily passes the monobit test for the
aggregate distribution with m*n bits (as I hope is obvious -- passing it
means that the distribution is binomial in detail, not just uniformly
balanced.  However, it is simple enough to compute the monobit result
more or less in passing in the binomial test by simply summing the count
histogram at the end or aggregating a total 1-bit count as one goes.  In
that case one can generate two p-values -- a p-value for the monobit
test and one for the binomial -- in one pass for the same data.  I would
predict that the binomial p-value is strictly less than the monobit
p-value, and that there exist rng's that pass the monobit that
explicitly fail the binomial, but we can determine that empirically.

This chisq-based binomial test methodology can be used to improve nearly
any single test statistic in sts.  Instead of looking at the expected
value of the statistic itself, frame its generation as a Bernoulli trial
with a known percentage, compute the expected binomial distribution and
its error, generate the result histogram as the test statistic, and use
chisq and the complementary incomplete gamma function Q(a,x) to generate
a p-value over many smaller "independent" trials instead of one long
one.

This suggests ways of improving e.g. the runs and other tests as well,
see below.

                        The Runs Statistic

For n bits, count the test statistic X as the number of (overlapping) 01
and 10 pairs and add one.  Compute p_1 = (# ones)/n, p_0 = (1 - p_1)
(and ensure that they are close enough to p_0 = p_1 = 0.5).  Compute the
expected number of 01 and 10 pairs as Y = 2*n*p_1*p_0.  Compute the
expected error in the number of 01 and 10 pairs as sigma =
2*sqrt(2*n)*p_1*p_0.  Finally, compute the p-value as erfc(|X -
Y|/sigma).

This methodology seems questionable, at least to me.  

First of all, it seems odd to use a p_0 and p_1 derived from the sample,
given that the null hypothesis is p_0 = p_1 = 0.5 and independent.
Ensuring that the sample passes monobit (in a slightly different
formulation) to start means that one has conditionally >>accepted<< this
null hypothesis for the rng before beginning the runs test, using
different p's implies a different null hypothesis.

In addition, given their prior assumption that p_1 = # ones/# bits,
their computation of the probability of p_01 and p_10 (and hence Y) is
erroneous.  The probability of 01 in a finite string of n bits, subject
to constrained numbers of 0's and 1's needs to be computed WITHOUT
replacement, just as one does with a deck of cards.  After shuffling a
deck of cards known to contain four aces, the probability that the top
two cards are aces is not (4/52)*(4/52), but rather (4/52)*(3/52) -- if
the first card is an ace, it means there are fewer aces left in the deck
for the second card.  To be consistent, they should compute the expected
number of 01 strings in a 10-bit sequence containing 6 1's as
(4/10)(6/9) and not (4/10)(6/10).  They need to choose between a null
hypothesis of p_1 = p_0 = 0.5 (where they can presume successive bit
probabilities to be independent) and a null hypothesis of p_1 = (#
1's)/(# bits) and use "probability for a 1, given that the first draw is
a 0".  This matters for short strings.

Next, they don't wrap the n-value bitstring into a torus.  Consequently,
there are only n-1 bitpairs examined, and thus the expected value should
be Y = 2*(n-1)*p_1*p_0 and not 2*n*p_1*p_0.  For large n, of course, it
won't matter (neither will the previous two problems, at least not
much), but it is surprisingly sloppy mathematically.

In addition there is no reason I can see to add a 1 to the test
statistic of (# of 01 and 10 pairs in an overlapping scan of the
string).  This is very difficult to understand, as it clearly breaks the
symmetry of this test statistic with the complementary view where the
test statistic X is (# of 00 or 11 pairs in an overlapping scan of the
string) but Y and sigma are the same -- the sum of the Y's necessarily
equals n (or n-1, if that is the number of examined pairs).  This leads
to an obvious problem for short strings, e.g. n = 2, where the formula
they give for the expected number of 01 or 10's measured is
2*2*(1/2)*(1/2) = 1, but the statistic can only take on the values 1 or
2, each with probability 1/2.  There is something odd here.

Finally, it is more than a bit crazy to view this assessment as somehow
a measure of excessive sequential correlation, as a measure of "runs".
Let us reframe the test statistic (count of 01 and 10's) in terms of our
null hypothesis.  Presuming random, equal probability 0's and 1's, we
expect 25% each of 00 01 10 11.  Given an exemplary bit string of e.g.
1001101011, it doesn't really matter if one examines disjoint bitpairs
(10 01 10 10 11) (n/2 bitpairs for n even) or the overlapping bitpairs
10 00 01 11 10 01 10 01 11 11 (wrapping the last pair around
periodically to ensure symmetry and n pairs of bits, EACH pair is
expected to occur with a frequency, in the limit of many bitpairs, of
#bitpairs*(1/4).

Furthermore, in an ensemble of measurements of bitpair frequencies, each
distinct possibility is (for lots of identical bitsets) to be binomially
distributed with respect to the rest (as in p_01 = 1/4, p_!01 = 3/4)
regardless of whether or not sequential overlapping bitpairs are
counted.  We can understand this by noting that our null hypothesis (a
random generator producing pairs of bits) can be applied to any pair of
bits in any string.

Note also that in a given bitstring with periodic wraparound, the number
of 01 (overlapping) pairs must equal the number of 10 pairs.  This can
be proven with ease.  Every bit flipped can either change >>both<< the
01 and 10 count by one (flipping a bit with two neighbors that are both
0 or both 1) or it can leave them both the same (flipping a bit with a
neighboring 0 AND a neighboring 1).  This wreaks a certain measure of
havoc on the notion that each sequentially overlapping pair examined is
an independent measurement -- measuring any pair of (01 or 10 count) and
(00 or 11 count) suffices to determine the counts for all four possible
bit pairs.

The only question remaining is whether measuring the counts using
overlapping bitpairs is more or less rigorous a test than measuring the
counts using non-overlapping pairs.  That is, can a generator create a
bitstring that is correctly pairwise distributed in both non-overlapping
pair sequences but that is NOT correctly pairwise distributed in
overlapping pair sequences or vice versa.  The answer is not terribly
obvious, but if we make the very weak presumption that our test
measurments do not depend, on average, on whether we begin them
systematically at bit 0 or bit 1 (so that if we have a bad generator
we'll eventually fail for either starting point with roughly equal
frequency for different starting seeds and/or first-bit displacements),
then measuring both possibilities for each string should (on average)
produce results that are conservatively related to measuring one
possibility on twice as many strings.  

To put it another way, if a generator creates strings that >>fail<< the
overlapping test, they would necessarily fail at least one of the two
non-overlapping tests possible for the same bitstring, since the counts
for the two non-overlapping tests add to produce the count for the
non-overlapping test.  For this addition to push values out of
acceptable ranges one would require two deviations from the expected
value in the same direction.  If we only make the extremely weak
assumption that failure of the non-overlapping tests is equally likely
for both possible cyclic starting points, the 1/sqrt(2) scaling implicit
in using both strings is thus conservative.

However, we can easily average over this as well by simply randomly
starting each non-overlapping run on bit 0 or bit 1.  This might
actually simplify the code and provides an ADDITIONAL measure of
randomness as the two results should themselves be binomially
distributed, independently.

The final problem with runs is that it is not easy to see how to extend
it to a higher order.  For example, does 101 occur too often?  How about
010?  Again, each bit pattern should occur at a rigorously predicted
rate for p_0 = p_1 = 0.5 and independent bits, e.g. p_000 = p_001 =
p_010 = ... = 1/8 for any distinct three-bit combination, p_0000... =
1/16 for four-bit combinations, and so on.  EACH of these outcomes
should occur with binomially distributed frequencies when measured as a
bernoulli trial with p_xyz, (1 - p_xyz), making it easy to compute both
Y and sigma.  This suggests that the correct generalization of monobit
and runs (and probably more of the sts tests) is a test that (in one
pass):

   a) presumes a valid bitlevel rng so that p_0 = p_1 = 0.5 exactly, all
bits independent (null hypothesis).

   b) counts 1's (and infers 0's) for M sets of N bits, incrementing a
histogram vector of the number of 1's observed accordingly.  This is
rigorously compared for EACH possible value of the count to the expected
binomial distribution of counts.

   c) counts e.g. 00,01,10,11 overlapping pairs.  We showed above that
the count of 01's exactly equals the count of 10's.  The count of 11
pairs equals the total number of pairs less the count of 00's, 01's and
10's (all known).  Even though these are not all independent, there is
no harm and a small ease of coding advantage in binning all four counts
in four result histograms, each to be compared to its binomial
expectation.

   d) counts e.g. 000, 001, 010... overlapping pairs.  Here we IGNORE
possible count relationships for sure (as we won't stop with three
bits:-).  Again, bin the outcome count frequencies and compare to their
expected binomial distribution.

This process can continue indefinitely, as long as we can accumulate
enough counts in each pattern histogram to make aggregate statistics
reliable.  For example, at 8 bits, one is basically ensuring that the
distribution of ascii characters is BOTH overall uniform (has the
correct mean number of letters) AND that the actual distribution of
those letters in samples is correct from the point of view of Bernoulli
trials.

I think that this process is strengthened significantly by conducting it
simultaneously for all the sequences.  The first measures "bit frequency
and randomness".  The second measures "pairwise sequential
correlations".  The third measure "three-bit sequential correlations"
and so forth.  A sequence might pass the first and fail the second, pass
the first two and fail the third, pass the first seven and fail the
eighth, pass the first eight and fail the 32nd (so that floats formed
from the inverse are not uniformly distributed).

===============

Addendum to previous note.  The insight has struck me that all that this
does is give one the actual DISTRIBUTION of outcomes for any given
experiment.  The distribution of sample means should be -- guess what --
normal -- provided that there are enough elements in the sample itself.
For small numbers of elements in the sample, they should be binomial if
the experiment is framed as a bernoulli trial.  I'll bet that if I
convert smoothly from binomial into normal as the number of outcome
states exceeds the threshold where computing binomial probabilities is
reasonably possible, I'll see no difference in an appropriately computed
chisq!

This is the solution to the problem of doing long strings.  If I counted
e.g. bitpair combinations across a string of length 8, (for many
samples) binomial is appropriate.  If I count bitpair combinations
across a string of length 2^23 (8 million), I can't do binomial, but
don't have to.  Outcomes will be normally distributed about the expected
means.

SO, this is the answer to the bigger problem of why one should ever
trust "p-value" for a single sample, or even a dozen samples, of a
random process.  Sure (to quote Marsaglia) "p happens", but it doesn't
JUST happen, it happens according to a distribution.  Instead of
wondering if THIS occurrence of p = 0.02 from a single mean value is
reasonable or not, compute the p of an entire distribution of mean
values compared to the appropriate normal or binomial distribution, and
get a p-value one can really trust!

=======================

OK, so I'm stupid and I'm wrong.  sts_monobit is, in fact, more
sensitive than rgb_binomial although rgb_binomial might yet pick up a
generator that passes sts_monobit and fail it -- one that preserves the
symmetry of its 0/1 distribution about the midpoint (so the mean number
of 0's and 1's is correct) but has the >>wrong<< distribution, e.g. is
not binomial.

As it turns out, most distributions that fail rgb_binomial do not have
symmetry about their midpoint and consequently fail sts_monobit "before"
failing rgb_binomial.  If you like, rgb_binomial only becomes reliable
when there is enough data to fill the primary non-zero bins near the
middle, which takes a goodly chunk of data.  sts_monobit, in the
meantime, just adds up the number of 0's and 1's while steadily chopping
down sigma -- by the time one has sampled a few thousand bits a lot of
rng's are already 0/1 asymmetric enough to fail monobit, but the bin
sigma's are still large enough to forgive a lot of slop in any given
bin.

Interestingly, binomial can be applied to very small bitstrings -- in
fact, to bitstrings of length 1 (I think).  At that point it should
become equivalent to monobit, but in a somewhat different way,
especially since rgb_binomial now evaluates monobit directly on the
accumulated bit values.

Looks like I >>do<< have some work to do to fully understand everything,
I do I do...;-)

==============

Whoo, dawgies!  Out of a bit of insight, rgb_persist was born, and it
explains why a LOT of rng's suck incredibly.  Lots of rng's quite
literally never change the contents of certain bits (usually lower
order bits).  One common symptom is for an rng to always return odd
or even numbers.  Another common symptom is for a rng to fail a
distributional test when the repeated bits are measured (as repeated 1's
cause an excess of 1's, repeated 0's an excess of 0's, even repeated
01's can cause runs/bitpair tests to fail).  Worse, rgb_persist clearly
shows that MOST rng's that exhibit the problem at all exhibit it
STRONGLY (LOTS of repeated lower order bits) for at least some seeds.
Using them, one runs a significant (indeed, a near "sure thing") risk of
encountering seeds such that as many as 18 bits out of 32 are repeated,
leaving one with only a fraction of the variation you thought you
had.

At this point, I'd have to say that rgb_persist is one of the first
tests to run on ANY rng, and any rng that fails it should probably
just be rejected out of hand -- even if only the last (least
significant) bit is repeated, it seems dangerous to use an rng that
produces only even or only odd numbers from any given seed, even for
games.

Writing the dumpbits and rgb_persist routines also gave me insight into
how rgb_binomial and even the sts routines might be failing relative to
their design goals.  I've been processing bits least to most
significant, and I've been ignoring random_max when doing so.  This is
a capital mistake, as of course an rng will fail when it only returns
e.g. 16 bits in a 32 bit slot (and the other bits are necessarily
repeated).  I've probably been "passing" only rng's that return a full
32 "random bits" (and of course don't fail e.g. rgb_persist()).

SO, I need to rewrite sts_monobit, sts_runs, and rgb_binomial (last
first) so that they only check bits in the valid part of each returned
word.  This will be modestly annoying, but is of course absolutely
necessary for the results to mean a damn thing.

====================

Note the new test rgb_bitdist, which is the BEST generalization of
sts_monobit and perhaps better than rgb_binomial as well.  We need to
merge sts_monobit, rgb_persist, and rgb_bitdist into a single test
that measures the total/average bit number, the per-bit-slot
total/average number, and derives the cumulative bitmask of repeated
bits.

Two additional directions to take this:

First:

   generate a set of Ntest variables for e.g.
     1 bit
     2 bit
     3 bit
     4 bit
     ...
     N bit

combinations (one each).  For number of bits and bitpattern, sweep the
bitstring and accumulate the frequency histogram (for each possible
bitpattern in each string location)

  ntest[no_of_bits].x[bit_pattern_slot]

with periodic wraparound on the bitstring and so forth -- this is, in
fact, sts_runs but for arbitrary numbers of bits and accumulating BOTH
the totals AND the actual distribution, and check the chisq on the
distribution and the pvalue of the total expected.

Second:

Here we look for subtle sequential bitlevel correlations.  We do the
same test as before, except that the frequency histogram is LATERAL --
doing each bit position in a sequential fashion.  This test should see a
clear failure for bits that don't change (strong sequential correlation,
that) but should ALSO discover individual bits that do things like:
01010101 or 0011110000111100 or any other "balanced" repetition.

In fact, we may eventually do a fft on the forward sequential bit
sequences to see if there are even very weak sequential bit-level
correlations like 001010100001100010 (where every sequential triplet has
two 0's and one 1), even if the triplets themselves are "random".  A
good frequency test on all 3-way bit patterns should catch this, of
course, and the lovely thing about binary is that I can always use a
suitably masked integer conversion of the bit pattern itself as the
histogram index!  So it needn't be TOO horrible to encode.

=====================================================

Note on diehard parking lot test.  First of all, the documentation for
the test is incorrect -- it tests for "crashes" (overlap) of SQUARE cars
with sides of length 1, not ROUND cars of RADIUS one as Marsaglia's
documentation and comments assert.  If round cars ("helicopters", to
borrow Marsaglia's term) are used a different distribution is obtained
with mean over 4000.

Actually to me, round cars seems very very similar to one of Knuth's
tests for hyperplanar distribution of random coordinates, which has a
much more solid theoretical foundation; I suspect the tests are more or
less equivalent in sensitivity and will yield identical success/failure
patterns in 99% of all cases (maybe even 100%).  And the sensitivity of
this test sucks -- it was very difficult for me to find a test that
failed it out of the entire GSL collection (trying a half dozen
known-weak generators or more in the process).  The one that finally DID
fail it really, really sucked and failed all sorts of other tests.

I'd be interested to see if this test deserves to live, in the long run.
I rather suspect that Knuth tests in variable dimensions will yield a
much more systematic view of RNG failure, just as rgb_bitdist does
compared to e.g. runs tests.

==================================================================
07/11/06

I've just finished testing Marsaglia's bitstream test, and it is (like
rgb_bitdist) a test that nothing survives.  In fact, it is a dead
certainty that rgb_bitdist is a better version of the same basic test,
and that generators that fail rgb_bitdist at (say) 6 bits are going to
fail Marsaglia's less sensitive 20-bit test.  What his test does that
bitstream doesn't is use a single relatively coarse grained test
statistic -- the expected number of missing 20 bit numbers out of 2
million trials -- instead of doing what rgb_bitdist does, which is
do a chisq test on the fractional occupancy of the entire VECTOR of 20
bit numbers.

Research question:  Which is more sensitive AT 20 bits?  It seems to me
that the chisq vector test is clearly superior as it would catch many
possible "bad" distributions that conserved the mean number of missing
numbers at this sample size (however unlikely such special deviations
might be in practice) but then there is the question of sensitivity
given a fixed sample size.  SO FAR, however, rgb_bitdist continues to
be the premier test for revealing failure, with nothing getting out
alive past 6 bits, ASSUMING that I'm computing the vector chisq and
p-value per run correctly and not just revealing that I'm using the
wrong form as the number of bits goes up.

Oh, and nothing survives diehard_bitdist EITHER, at least when one
cranks the test up past Marsaglia's wimply 20 iterations to (say) 200.
At that point the non-uniformity of the p-distribution is absolutely
apparent -- it even has structure.  That is, some seeds lead to biased
results that are TOO CLOSE to the mean value and not properly
distributed... an interesting observation all by itself.

   rgb

==================================================================
07/11/06 later that day...

diehard_count_1s_stream() now WORKS!  What a PITA!  And (I suspect) how
unnecessary all the complexity!  This test (as it turns out) computes
chisq on what amounts to a strangely remapped rgb_bitdist test
(precisely!) on four and five digit base 5 integers obtained by
remapping bytes based on the number of 1's therein.

That is, 256 possibilities are reduced to 5, each with a
trivial-to-compute frequency/probability, the base 5 integer is left
shifted (base 5!) and added to the next one to cumulate 4 or 5 digit
numbers, those numbers are then counted, and the counts compared to the
EXPECTED counts given the number of samples and turned into chisq (one
each, for 4 and for 5 digit numbers).  Sigh.

OK then, we COULD just print the p-value of those chisq's -- an
absolutely straightforward process.  Alternatively, we could do what
Marsaglia does -- compute the DIFFERENCE of the chisq's themselves,
which of course are supposedly distributed around the number of degrees
of freedom of each one separately, that is 3125 - 625 = 2500!  This is
the mean value of the difference, with stddev = sqrt(2*2500).  This
final result is turned into a p-value.

This of course is wierd and wrong in so many ways.  For one, it is
entirely possible for chisq_4 and chisq_5 to differ systematically from
their expected values, and it is perfectly possible and likely that
those deviations would occur in the same direction -- e.g. down -- so
that the 4 byte and 5 byte streams BOTH have fewer degrees of freedom
than expected.  Of course in this case part of the individual deviations
CANCEL and is not visible in the final p-value!  

Honestly, I can think of pretty much "no" reasonable ways that this
final pvalue can fail where any/all of the p-values for the 4 or 5 (or 2
or 3 or 1 or 17) digit distributions would not also fail, but I can (and
just did) think of a way that the final p-value might MARGINALLY pass
while the individual p-values fail.

Although the general approach is a good one, what is clearly needed is a
new test -- one that extends rgb_bitdist to multidigit strings of smaller
base.  For example, right now rgb_bitdist tests the FREQUENCY of the
occurrence of all 5 digit strings but not all 5 digit strings taken two
at a time (32 x 32 = 1K possbilities).  Of course one REASON that I
don't do that is that I >>already<< do e.g. 10 bit strings -- the DIRECT
frequency distribution of those 1K possibilities, which obviously
samples all the 5 bit combos taken two at a time!.  And besides, every
rng I have tested fails at the level of what amounts to two digit octal
numbers -- six bit strings.  So I'm cynical about this.

I also don't think that this really counts 1's.  How is this one iota
different from simply evaluating the distribution of bytes (8 bit
randoms)?  If the complete distribution of 8 bit bytes (rgb_bitdist at 8
bits) is random, ALL DERIVED DISTRIBUTIONS are random, with the only
catchy part being temporal/sequential correlations that might be
revealed from taking the strings four or five bytes at a time (at the
expense of compressing the information tremendously).

Once again, this test seems reduceable to but not as sensitive as
rgb_bitdist at a given level, unfortunately a level far beyond where all
known rng's fail anyway.  It is a MEASURE of the lack of sensitivity
that this does does NOT fail for many of those rng's where rgb_bitdist
does...

   rgb
